Decision Science Letters 3 (2014) 391–396

Contents lists available at GrowingScience

Decision Science Letters
homepage: www.GrowingScience.com/dsl

A hybrid Tabu search-simulated annealing method to solve quadratic assignment problem

Mohamad Amin Kaviania*, Mehdi Abbasib, Bentolhoda Rahpeymab and Mohamad Mehdi Yusefib

a
b

Young Researchers and Elite Club, Shiraz Branch, Islamic Azad University, Shiraz, Iran
Department of Industrial engineering, Shiraz Branch, Islamic Azad University, Shiraz, Iran

CHRONICLE
Article history:
Received October 15, 2013
Accepted January 24, 2014
Available online
February 23 2014
Keywords:
Hybrid optimization
Simulated annealing
Tabu search
Quadratic assignment problem
Meta heuristic methods

ABSTRACT
Quadratic assignment problem (QAP) has been considered as one of the most complicated
problems. The problem is NP-Hard and the optimal solutions are not available for large-scale
problems. This paper presents a hybrid method using tabu search and simulated annealing
technique to solve QAP called TABUSA. Using some well-known problems from QAPLIB
generated by Burkard et al. (1997) [Burkard, R. E., Karisch, S. E., & Rendl, F. (1997).
QAPLIB–a quadratic assignment problem library. Journal of Global Optimization, 10(4), 391403.], two methods of TABUSA and TS are both coded on MATLAB and they are compared in
terms of relative percentage deviation (RPD) for all instances. The performance of the proposed
method is examined against Tabu search and the preliminary results indicate that the hybrid
method is capable of solving real-world problems, efficiently.

© 2014 Growing Science Ltd. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction
Koopmans and Beckman (1957) are believed to be the first who introduced the quadratic assignment
problem (QAP) in the context of locating “indivisible economic activities”. The primary objective of
QAP problem is to assign a set of facilities to a set of locations such that the total assignment cost is
minimized. The assignment cost for a pair of facilities is considered as a function of the flow between
the facilities and the distance between the locations of the facilities. Ahmed (2013) presented a new
reformulation of the problem and developed a Lexisearch Algorithm (LSA) to obtain exact optimal
solution to this problem. He performed a comparative study to show the efficiency of the algorithm
against an existing algorithm for some medium sized instances from the QAP library, QAPLIB
(Burkard et al., 1997; Burkard, 2013).

* Corresponding author.
E-mail addresses: aminkaviani1366@yahoo.com (M.A. Kaviani)
© 2014 Growing Science Ltd. All rights reserved.
doi: 10.5267/j.dsl.2014.2.004

392

Forghani and Mohammadi (2012) presented an integrated quadratic assignment and continuous
facility layout problem. They obtained the arrangement of facilities within the departments through
the QAP. They presented mathematical model as a mixed-integer programming (MIP) to minimize
total material handling cost. In addition, they presented a heuristic method to solve the problem for
large-scale problems and using several illustrative numerical examples, the performance of the model
was examined. Tasgetiren et al. (2013) presented some metaheuristics to solve QAP problems. Tseng
and Liang (2006) presented a hybrid metaheuristic for the quadratic assignment problem. Wang
(2007) applied Tabu search to solve QAP problem.
2. The proposed study
2.1. Problem statement
In quadratic assignment problem, we are concerned with assignment of two facilities i and j in two
possible places of k and l. Let xik be a binary variable, which is one if facility i is located in place k
and zero, otherwise. In addition, Let x jl be a binary variable, which is one if facility j is located in
place l and zero, otherwise. Let cijkl be the cost of assigning location i in place k and location j in
place l. Therefore, the proposed study considers the following,
n

n

n

n

 QAP  min  cijkl xijkl

(1)

i 1 j 1 k 1 l 1

subject to
n

 x  1, j  1,..., n ,

(2)

ij

i 1

 x  1, i  1,..., n ,

(3)

xij  0,1, i  1,..., n, j  1,..., n .

(4)

n

ij

j 1

Eq. (1) states the objective function of the QAP problem and it minimizes sum of costs associated
with facility assignment. Eq. (2) ensures that only any facility is assigned to only one place. Eq. (3)
specifies that only each location is considered only for one place. Eq. (4) states that all variables are
binay. The QAP problem is generally considered as an NP-Hard problem (Çela, 1998; Anstreicher,
2003) and cannot be solved using combinatorial optimization techniques. Therefore, an alternative
solution is to use heuristic as well as meta-heuristics to tackle such problem although there are
recently some studies concentrated on reformulation of QAP in an attempt to provide exact solution
(Loiola et al., 2007).
2.2. Tabu search
During the past two decades, there have been various metaheuristics to solve QAP such as Tabu
search, which was originally developed by Glover (1986, 1989, 1990). Neighborhood searches take a
potential solution to a problem and verify its immediate local opportunities, which is, solutions that
are similar except for one or two minor details to detect an improved solution. Local search
techniques tend to become stuck in suboptimal regions or on plateaus where several solutions are
equally fit. Tabu search takes advantage of the performance of these methods by using memory
structures, which explain the visited solutions or user-provided sets of rules. If a potential solution has
been already visited within a certain short-term period or if it has already violated a rule, it is marked
as "tabu" (forbidden) so that the algorithm would not reconsider that possibility, repeatedly (Hertz et
al., 1995). Hussin and Stutzle (2011) presented a high performing stochastic local search algorithms

M.A. Kaviani et al. / Decision Science Letters 3 (2014)

393

for the QAP and their performance in dependence to the instance structure and size. Misevičius
(2003) proposed a modified simulated annealing algorithm for the QAP - M-SA-QAP. They
examined their algorithm on a number of instances from the library of the QAP instances – QAPLIB
and reported that the proposed algorithm seemed to be superior to earlier versions of the simulated
annealing for the QAP. Saifullah Hussin and Stützle (2014) compared the performance of Tabu
search vs. simulated annealing as a function of the size of quadratic assignment problem instances.
They reported that the assertion whether one algorithm is better than the other could depend strongly
on QAP instance size even if one focuses on instances with otherwise same characteristics. Wilhelm
and Ward (1987) applied simulated annealing to solve QAP problem. Fig. 1 shows the structure of
Tabu search method.
Step 1. Let S be the initial feasible solution and Z its objective function value; then, set
S* = S,
Z* = Z, max short-term memory (STM) = 5, and max iteration = 1,000;
iter = 1. Best O value = O value.
Step 2. Random (i, j) = rand/Long-term memory (LTM) (i, j), (n1, n2) = the indices of maximum value
in random.
Step 3. If there is none (n1, n2) in STM matrix, change n1 and n2 locations; otherwise, repeat step 2.
Step 4. Insert n1 and n2 in STM and release the last indices from STM (e.g., m1, m2); and LTM(m1,
m2) = LTM(m1, m2) + 1.
Step 5. Calculate the objective function value (Z) of the new permutation.
Step 6. If Z ≤ Z*, then Z* = Z, S* = S, and iter = iter + 1.
Step 7. If iter ≤ max iteration, then repeat step 2; otherwise, print Z* and S*.
Fig. 1. Tabu search algorithm

2.3. Simulated annealing
Simulated annealing (SA) is a generic probabilistic metaheuristic for combinatorial optimization
problem of locating a good approximation to the global optimum of a given function in a relatively
large search space. The method is often implemented when the search space is discrete such as QAP
problems. For certain problems, SA may be more efficient than exhaustive enumeration rather than
the best possible solution. Paul (2010) reported that for a number of varied problem instances, SA
could perform better for higher quality targets while TS performs better for lower quality targets. Fig.
2 shows details of the SA method.
s  Generate Initial Solution( )
T  T0
while termination conditions not met do
s   Pick At Random (N(s))
if ( f ( s  ) < f (s)) then
s  s
else
Accept s  as new solution with probability p (T, s  , s)
end if
Update(T)
end while

Fig. 2. The structure of SA method
The proposed study of this paper propose a hybrid of Tabu and SA method. Fig. 3 shows details of
Pseudu code of the proposed study.

394

step1 :
initialize S as initial solution and z= evaluate objective fuction
step1. 3 : S*=S and Z*=Z ;
STM=5;// max short-term memory
maxiteration=1000; iter=1; best value O = O value
step2: randomize
step2.1: for i =1 to n do
for j =1 to n do
RANDOM(i,j)=rand/LTM;
step2.2 : (i,j) and(n1,n2)=index of (RANDOM  STM);
step3 : T=0;
for i=1 to size(STM,1) do
for j=1 to size(STM,2) do;
if( (n1,n2)==STM(i,j) )
T=1; repeat Step 2
if( T=0)
{
temp=n1;
n1=n2;
n2=temp
}
Step 4:
m1=size(STM,1) ;
m2=size(STM,2) ;
(n1,n2)=STM(m1,m2);
LTM(m1,m2)=LTM(m1,m2)+1;
step5: z=evaluate objective function;
step 6 :
if( z<=z*) ; z*=z
{
S*=S;
iter=iter+1
}
step7: if (iter<=max iteration) ; repeat step 2 ; else print z* and S*
Fig. 3. Hybrid Tabu-Simulated Annealing Pseudo-code
3. The results
In this section, we present details of the implementation of the proposed study (TABUSA) and
compares the results with pure Tabu search method (TS). Using some well known problems from
QAPLIB generated by Burkard et al. (1997), two methods of TABUSA and TS are both coded on
MATLAB and they are compared with relative percentage deviation (RPD) for all instances. Table 1
shows details of our results.

M.A. Kaviani et al. / Decision Science Letters 3 (2014)

395

Table 1
The summary of comparison of TABUSA versus TS
Name of instances
n
Nug 12
12
14
Nug 14
Nug 15
15
16
Nug 16a
Nug 16b
16
17
Nug 17
Nug 18
18
20
Nug 20
Nug 25
25
Bur26a
26
Bur26b
26
Bur26c
26
Bur26d
26
Bur26e
26
Bur26f
26
Bur26g
26
Bur26h
26
Tai25a
25
Tai30a
30
Tai40a
40
Tai50a
50
Average of RPDs

BKS
578
1014
1150
1610
1240
1732
1930
2570
3744
5426670
3817852
5426795
3821225
5386879
3782044
10117172
7098658
1167256
1818146
3139370
4938796

RPD of TS solutions
0.00
0.39
0.87
1.37
0.00
0.69
1.04
1.56
1.55
0.09
0.19
0.26
0.02
0.03
0.05
0.01
0.01
4.26
4.75
6.12
6.49
1.41

RPD of Hybrid Tabu-SA solutions
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.38
0.12
0.00
0.02
0.01
0.01
0.00
0.03
0.00
2.74
2.71
3.82
4.12
0.66

As we can observe from the results of Table 1, the proposed study of this paper is capable of finding
optimal solutions in most cases and performs better than TS method. Fig. 4 shows details of error for
two methods.
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0

TS

Hybrid TS‐SA

Fig. 4. Comparison of RPDs for TABUSA versus TS
4. Conclusion
In this paper, we have presented a hybrid method based on two well known methods, Tabu search and
simulated annealing to solve QAP problem. The proposed model fo this paper has been implemented
on some benchmarks and the results have confirmed that the new hybrid method could perform better
than pure Tabu search method to solve QAP problems. However, we should cuatios about the
findings since we may need to apply the proposed model of more instances to make more reliable
conclusion.

396

Acknowledgement
The authors would like to thank the annonymous referees for constructive comments on earlier
version of this paper.
References
Ahmed, Z. H. (2013). A New Reformulation and an Exact Algorithm for the Quadratic Assignment
Problem. Indian Journal of Science & Technology, 6(4), 4368-4377.
Anstreicher, K.M. (2003). Recent advances in the solution of quadratic assignment problems.
Mathematical Programming Series B, 97, 27-42.
Burkard, R. E., Karisch, S. E., & Rendl, F. (1997). QAPLIB–a quadratic assignment problem
library. Journal of Global Optimization, 10(4), 391-403.
Burkard, R. E. (2013). Quadratic assignment problems (pp. 2741-2814). Springer New York.
Çela, E. (1998). The Quadratic Assignment Problem: Theory and Algorithms. Kluwer Academic
Publishers, Dordrecht.
Forghani, K., & Mohammadi, M. (2012). Integrated quadratic assignment and continuous facility
layout problem. International Journal of Industrial Engineering Computations, 3(5), 787-806.
Glover, F. (1986). Future paths for integer programming and links to artificial intelligence.
Computers & Operations Research, 13(5), 533-549.
Glover, F. (1989). Tabu Search - Part 1. ORSA Journal on Computing, 1(2), 190–206.
Glover, F. (1990). Tabu Search - Part 2. ORSA Journal on Computing, 2(1), 4–32.
Hertz, A., Taillard, E., & De Werra, D. (1995). A tutorial on tabu search. InProc. of Giornate di
Lavoro AIRO, 95, 13-24.
Hussin, M. S., & Stutzle, T. (2011, December). High performing stochastic local search algorithms
for the QAP and their performance in dependence to the instance structure and size. In Hybrid
Intelligent Systems (HIS), 2011 11th International Conference on (pp. 139-144). IEEE.
Koopmans, T. C., & Beckmann, M. J. (1957). Assignment problems and the location of economic
activities. Econometrica, 25, 53-76.
Loiola, E. M., De Abreu, N. M. M., Boaventura-Netto, P. O., Hahn, P., & Querido, T. (2007). A
survey for the quadratic assignment problem. European Journal of Operational Research,
176(2), 657-690.
Misevičius, A. (2003). A modified simulated annealing algorithm for the quadratic assignment
problem. Informatica, 14(4), 497-514.
Paul, G. (2010). Comparative performance of tabu search and simulated annealing heuristics for the
quadratic assignment problem. Operations Research Letters, 38(6), 577-581.
Saifullah Hussin, M., & Stützle, T. (2014). Tabu search vs. simulated annealing as a function of the
size of quadratic assignment problem instances. Computers & Operations Research, 43, 286-291.
Tasgetiren, M. F., Pan, Q. K., Suganthan, P. N., & Dizbay, I. E. (2013, April). Metaheuristic
algorithms for the quadratic assignment problem. InComputational Intelligence In Production And
Logistics Systems (CIPLS), 2013 IEEE Workshop on (pp. 131-137). IEEE.
Tseng, L. Y., & Liang, S. C. (2006). A hybrid metaheuristic for the quadratic assignment
problem. Computational Optimization and Applications, 34(1), 85-113.
Wang, J. C. (2007, November). Solving quadratic assignment problems by a tabu based simulated
annealing algorithm. In Intelligent and Advanced Systems, 2007. ICIAS 2007. International
Conference on (pp. 75-80). IEEE.
Wilhelm, M. R., & Ward, T. L. (1987). Solving quadratic assignment problems by ‘simulated
annealing’. IIE transactions, 19(1), 107-119.

